सञ्जय O Sanjaya !  - Vocative Singular of the Masculine noun 
धर्म-क्षेत्रे on the field of the working out of the Dharma  - 
कुरु-क्षेत्रे on the field of Kurukshetra  - 
समवेताः gathered together  - Nominative Plural of the Masculine form of the Past Passive participial Adjective 
युयुत्सवः those eager for battle  - Nominative Plural of the desi. Verbal Masculine noun 
मामकाः my own people  - Nominative Plural of the Masculine form of the pronominal Adjective 
पाण्डवाः the sons of Pandu  - Nominative Plural of the Masculine noun 
च and  - Conjunction particle. Indeclinable (and, both, also, as well as)
एव indeed  - Indeclinable particle used to 
किम्‌ what  - Nominative or Accusative Singular of the Neuter form of the Pronoun 
अकुर्वत did  - Imperfect 3rd Person Plural of the Etmanepada Verbal root  
तदा  तु tu then  - Adverb Indeclinable (then or at that time or in that case).
राजा the prince (king)  - Nominative Singular of the Masculine noun 
दुर्योधनः Duryodhana  - Nominative Singular of the Masculine noun 
व्यूढम्‌ arrayed in battle order  - Accusative Singular of the Neuter form of the Past participial Adjective 
पाण्डव-अनीकम्‌ the army of the Pandavas  - 
दृष्ट्वा having seen  - Indeclinable Past Participle or Gerund form of the Verbal root  
आचार्यम्‌ to the teacher  - Accusative Singular of the Masculine noun 
उपसङ्गम्य, having approached  - Indeclinable Past Participle or Gerund  form of the Verbal root  
(इदं) वचनम्‌ (these) words  - 
अब्रवीत्‌ spoke  - Imperfect 3rd Person Singular of the Verbal root  
हे आचार्य! O Acharya (preceptor) !  - 
तव thy  - Genitive Singular of the Masculine form of the Pronoun 
धीमता (by) intelligent  - 
शिष्येण (by) disciple  - lnst. Singular of the Masculine noun 
द्रुपद-पुत्रेण by Drupada’s son  - Instrumental Singular of the Masculine Compound noun 
व्यूढाम्‌ arrayed  - Accusative Singular of the Feminine form of the Past Passive participial Adjective 
पाण्डु-पुत्राणाम्‌ of the sons of Pandu  - Genitive Plural of the Masculine Compound noun 
एताम्‌ to this  - Accusative Singular of the Feminine form of the Pronoun 
महतीम्‌ mighty  - 
चमूम्‌ host  - Accusative Singular of the Feminine noun 
पश्य behold  - Imperative 2nd  Person Singular of the Verbal root  
अत्र here (in this mighty army)  - Adverb Indeclinable (here, in this connection)
महा-इषु-आसाः great bowmen  - 
युधि in the battle  - Locative Singular of the Feminine noun 
भीम-अर्जुन-समाः equal to Bhima and Arjuna  - 
शूराः heroes  - Nominative Plural of the Masculine form of the Adjective 
युयुधानः Yuyudhana  - Nominative Singular of the Masculine noun 
विराटः Virata  - Nominative Singular of the Masculine noun 
महारथः one having the great car  - 
द्रुपदः Drupada  - Nominative Singular of the Masculine noun 
च and  - Conjunction particle. Indeclinable (and, both, also, as well as)
धृष्टकेतुः Dhrishtaketu  - 
चेकितानः Chekitana  - Nominative Singular of the Masculine noun 
वीर्यवान्‌ the valiant  - 
काशिराजः prince of Kashi  - 
च and  - Conjunction particle. Indeclinable (and, both, also, as well as)
पुरुजित्‌ Purujit  - Nominative Singular of the Masculine Compound noun 
कुन्तिभोजः Kuntibhoja  - Nominative Singular of the Masculine noun 
च and  - Conjunction particle. Indeclinable (and, both, also, as well as)
नर-पुङ्गवः foremost among men  - Nominative Singular of the Masculine form of the Compound Adjective 
शैब्यः Shaibya  - Nominative Singular of the Masculine noun 
च and  - Conjunction particle. Indeclinable (and, both, also, as well as)
विक्रान्तः the strong  - Nominative Singular of the Masculine form of the Adjective 
युधामन्युः Yudhamanyu  - Nominative Singular of the Masculine noun 
च and  - Conjunction particle. Indeclinable (and, both, also, as well as)
वीर्यवान्‌ the victorious  - 
उत्तमौजाः Uttamauja  - Nominative Singular of the Masculine form of the Compound Adjective 
च and  - Conjunction particle. Indeclinable (and, both, also, as well as)
सौभद्रः Subhadra’s son (Abhimanyu)  - Nominative Singular of the Masculine noun 
द्रौपदेयाः the sons of Draupadi  - Nominative Plural of the Masculine noun 
च and  - Conjunction particle. Indeclinable (and, both, also, as well as)
सर्वे all of them  - Nominative Plural of the Masculine form of the Pronoun 
एव indeed  - Indeclinable particle used to 
महारथाः of great prowess  - 
हे द्विज-उत्तम! O best of the twice-born !  - 
अस्माकम्‌ (on) our (side)  - Genitive Plural of the Pronoun 
ये those who  - Nominative Plural of the Masculine form of the relative Pronoun 
विशिष्टाः the most distinguished  - Nominative Plural of the Masculine form of the Past participial Adjective 
मम सैन्यस्य of my army  - 
नायकाः the leaders  - Nominative Plural of the Masculine noun 
तान्‌ those  - Accusative Plural of the Masculine form of the Pronoun 
तु also  - Indeclinable adversative particle (indeed, but, sometimes used as a mere expletive).
निबोध know  - Imperative 2nd  Person Singular of the Verbal root  
ते for thy  - Nominative Plural of the Masculine form of the Pronoun 
संज्ञार्थम्‌ special notice  - The Feminine noun 
तान्‌ those  - Accusative Plural of the Masculine form of the Pronoun 
ब्रवीमि I speak (or I name)  - Present 1st Person Singular of the Verbal root  
भवान्‌ thyself  - Nominative Singular of the Masculine form of the Pronoun 
भीष्मः Bhishma  - Nominative Singular of the Masculine noun 
च and  - 
कर्णः Karna  - Nominative Singular of the Masculine noun 
च and  - Conjunction particle. Indeclinable (and, both, also, as well as)
समितिञ्जयः the victorious in battle  - Nominative Singular of the Masculine form of the Compound Adjective 
कृपः Kripa  - Nominative Singular of the Masculine noun 
च and  - Conjunction particle. Indeclinable (and, both, also, as well as)
तथा and  - Adverb Indeclinable (like that, in that manner, so, thus).
एव also  - Indeclinable particle used to 
अश्वत्थामा Ashvatthama  - Nominative Singular of the Masculine noun 
विकर्णः Vikarna  - Nominative Singular of the Masculine noun 
च and  - Conjunction particle. Indeclinable (and, both, also, as well as)
सौमदत्तिः Saumadatti  - Nominative Singular of the Masculine noun 
च and  - Conjunction particle. Indeclinable (and, both, also, as well as)
अन्ये other  - Nominative Plural of the Masculine form of the pronominal Adjective 
च and  - Conjunction particle. Indeclinable (and, both, also, as well as)
बहवः many  - Nominative Plural of the Masculine form of the Adjective 
शूराः heroes  - Nominative Plural of the Masculine form of the Adjective 
नाना-शस्त्र-प्रहरणाः armed with diverse weapons and missiles  - 
सर्वे they are all  - Nominative Plural of the Masculine form of the Pronoun 
युद्ध-विशारदाः well-skilled in war  - Nominative Plural of the Masculine form of the Compound Adjective 
मदर्थे for my sake  - Locative Singular of the Masculine Compound noun 
त्यक्त-जीविताः have renounced their life  - Nominative Plural of the Masculine form of the Compound Adjective 
भीष्म-अभिरक्षितम्‌ marshalled by Bhishma  - 
अस्माकम्‌ ours  - Genitive Plural of the Pronoun 
तत्‌ that  - Nominative or Accusative Singular of the Pronoun or Adjective 
बलम्‌ force/army  - Nominative or Accusative Singular of the Neuter noun 
अपर्याप्तम्‌ unlimited  - Nominative Singular of the Neuter form of the Compound Adjective 
भीम-अभिरक्षितम्‌ depending on Bhima  - 
एतेषाम्‌ theirs  - Genitive Plural of the Masculine form of the Pronoun 
इदम्‌ this  - Nominative Singular of the Neuter form of the Pronoun 
बलम्‌ force/army  - Nominative or Accusative Singular of the Neuter noun 
तु while  - Indeclinable adversative particle (indeed, but, sometimes used as a mere expletive).
पर्याप्तम्‌ limited  - Nominative Singular of the Neuter form of the Adjective 
सर्वेषु अयनेषु in all the different fronts of the battle  - 
च and  - Conjunction particle. Indeclinable (and, both, also, as well as)
यथा-भागम्‌ in respective divisions  - Adverbial Compound Indeclinable (in the respective divisions).
अवस्थिताः standing  - Nominative Plural of the Masculine form of the Past participial Adjective 
भवन्तः सर्वे sarve you all  - 
भीष्मम्‌ (to) Bhishma  - Accusative Singular of the Masculine noun 
एव indeed  - Indeclinable particle used to 
अभिरक्षन्तु guard  - Imperative 3rd Person Singular of the Verbal root  
कुरु-वृद्धः the ancient of the Kurus  - Nominative Singular of the Masculine form of the Compound Adjective 
प्रतापवान्‌ the mighty  - Nominative Singular of the Masculine form of the Adjective 
पितामहः grandsire (Bhishma)  - Nominative Singular of the Masculine noun 
तस्य his (heart – the heart of Duryodhana)  - Genitive Singular of the Masculine or Neuter form of the Pronoun 
हर्षम्‌ सञ्जनयन्‌ cheering  - 
उच्चैः terribly/loudly  - Instrumental Plural of the Masculine form of the Adjective 
सिंहनादम्‌ a lion's roar  - Accusative Singular of the Masculine Compound noun 
विनद्य resounding  - Indeclinable Past Participle or Gerund form of the Verbal root  
शङ्खम्‌ conch  - Accusative Singular of the Masculine noun 
दध्मौ blew  - Perfect 3rd Person Plural of the Verbal root  
ततः then  - Adverb Indeclinable (then).
शङ्खाः conchs  - Nominative Plural of the Masculine noun. 
भेर्यः kettledrums  - Nominative Singular of the Feminine noun 
च and  - Conjunction particle. Indeclinable (and, both, also, as well as)
पणव-आनक-गोमुखाः tabors and drums and horns  - 
च and  - Conjunction particle. Indeclinable (and, both, also, as well as)
सहसा एव suddenly (all at once)  - 
अभ्यहन्यन्त blared forth  - Imperfect 3rd Person Plural of the Verbal root  
सः that  - Nominative Singular of the Masculine form of the Pronoun 
शब्दः clamour  - Nominative Singular of the Masculine noun 
तुमुलः tremendous  - Nominative Singular of the Masculine form of the Adjective 
अभवत्‌ became  - Imperfect 3rd Person Singular of the Verbal root  
ततः then  - Adverb Indeclinable (then).
श्वेतैः white  - Instrumental Plural of the Masculine form of the Adjective 
हयैः horses  - Instrumental Plural of the Masculine noun 
युक्ते yoked to  - Locative Singular of the Masculine form of the Past Passive participial Adjective 
महति in great  - Accusative Singular of the Feminine form of the Adjective 
स्यन्दने chariot  - Locative Singular of the Masculine noun 
स्थितौ seated  - Locative Singular of the Feminine noun 
माधवः Madhava (Sri Krishna)  - Nominative Singular of the Masculine noun 
पाण्डवः the son of Pandu (Arjuna)  - Nominative Singular of the Masculine noun 
च and  - Conjunction particle. Indeclinable (and, both, also, as well as)
दिव्यौ divine  - Accusative Dual of the Masculine form of the Adjective 
शङ्खौ conchs  - Accusative Dual of the Masculine noun 
प्रदध्मतुः blew  - Perfect 3rd Person Plural of the Verbal root  
एव also  - Indeclinable particle used to 
हृषीकेशः Hrishikesha (Krishna)  - Nominative Singular of the Masculine noun 
पाञ्चजन्यम्‌ the conch named Panchajanya  - 
धनञ्जयः Dhananjaya (Arjuna)  - 
देवदत्तम्‌ the conch named Devadatta (god-given)  - 
भीम-कर्मा of terrific deeds  - Nominative Singular of the Masculine form of the Compound Adjective 
वृक-उदरः Vrikodara (Bhima, the second son of Pandu)  - 
महा-शङ्खम्‌ mighty conch  - Accusative Singular of the Masculine Compound noun 
पौण्ड्रम्‌ (the conch named) Paundra  - 
दध्मौ blew  - Perfect 3rd Person Plural of the Verbal root  
कुन्ती-पुत्रः the son of Kunti  - Nominative Singular of the Masculine Compound noun 
राजा the King  - Nominative Singular of the Masculine noun 
युधिष्ठिरः Yudhishthira  - Nominative Singular of the Masculine noun 
अनन्तविजयम्‌ (blew the conch named) Anantavijaya  - 
नकुलः Nakula (the fourth son of Pandu)  - Nominative Singular of the Masculine noun 
सहदेवः Sahadeva (the fifth son of Pandu)  - Nominative Singular of the Masculine noun 
च and  - Conjunction particle. Indeclinable (and, both, also, as well as)
सुघोष-मणि-पुष्पकौ (blew the conchs named) Sughosha and Manipushpaka respectively  - 
हे पृथिवी-पते! O Lord of earth (Dhritarashtra) !  - 
परम-इषु-आसः of the great bow or excellent archer  - 
काश्यः Kashya, the king of Kashi  - Nominative Singular of the Masculine noun 
च and  - Conjunction particle. Indeclinable (and, both, also, as well as)
महारथः of the great chariot or the great car-warrior  - 
शिखण्डी Shikhandi (the elder son of king Drupada)  - Nominative Singular of the Masculine noun 
च and  - Conjunction particle. Indeclinable (and, both, also, as well as)
धृष्टद्युम्नः Dhrishtadyumna (the younger son of the king Drupada)  - 
विराटः च ca and  - 
अपराजितः the unconquered  - Nominative Singular of the Masculine form of the Compound Past Passive participial Adjective 
सात्यकिः Satyaki  - 
च and  - Conjunction particle. Indeclinable (and, both, also, as well as)
द्रुपदः king Drupada  - Nominative Singular of the Masculine noun 
द्रौपदेयाः the sons of Draupadi  - Nominative Plural of the Masculine noun 
च and  - Conjunction particle. Indeclinable (and, both, also, as well as)
महा-बाहुः the mighty-armed  - Nominative Singular of the Masculine form of the Compound Adjective 
सौभद्रः Saubhadra  - Nominative Singular of the Masculine noun 
च and  - Conjunction particle. Indeclinable (and, both, also, as well as)
सर्वशः on all sides  - Adverb Indeclinable (altogether and in every way).
पृथक्‌ पृथक्‌ severally  - 
शङ्खान्‌ conchs  - Accusative Plural of the Masculine noun 
दध्मुः blew  - Perfect 3rd Person Plural of the Verbal root  
सः that  - Nominative Singular of the Masculine form of the Pronoun 
तुमुलः tumultuous  - Nominative Singular of the Masculine form of the Adjective 
घोषः uproar  - Nominative Singular of the Masculine noun 
नभः sky  - Accusative Singular of the Neuter noun 
च and  - Conjunction particle. Indeclinable (and, both, also, as well as)
पृथिवीम्‌ earth  - Accusative Singular of the Feminine noun 
च and  - Conjunction particle. Indeclinable (and, both, also, as well as)
व्यनुनादयन्‌ resounding  - Nominative Singular of the Masculine form of the Present participial Adjective 
एव as well  - Indeclinable particle used to 
धार्त्रराष्ट्राणाम्‌ of the sons of Dhritarashtra  - 
हृदयानि hearts  - Accusative Plural of the Neuter noun 
व्यदारयत्‌ tore  - Imperfect 3rd Person Singular of the Verbal root  
हे महीपते! O Lord of earth  - 
अथ then  - Indeclinable copulative particle (and, also, then, it also shows the commencement of a literary work or of a new topic in such a work)
कपि-ध्वजः (he)whose emblem is an ape  - Nominative Singular of the Masculine form of the Compound Adjective 
पाण्डवः the son of Pandu (Arjuna)  - Nominative Singular of the Masculine noun 
व्यवस्थितान्‌ standing in battle order  - Accusative Plural of the Masculine form of the Past Passive participial Adjective 
धार्त्रराष्ट्रान्‌ the sons of Dhritarashtra  - 
दृष्ट्वा beholding  - Indeclinable Past Participle or Gerund form of the Verbal root  
शस्त्र-सम्पाते the flight of missiles  - Locative Singular of the Masculine Compound noun 
प्रवृत्ते having begun  - Locative Singular of the Present participial Adjective 
धनुः bow  - 
उद्यम्य took up  - Indeclinable Past Participle or Gerund form of the Verbal root  
तदा then  - Adverb Indeclinable (then or at that time or in that case).
हृषीकेशम्‌ to Hrishikesha  - Accusative Singular of the Masculine noun 
इदम्‌ this  - Nominative Singular of the Neuter form of the Pronoun 
वाक्यम्‌ word  - Nominative or Accusative Singular of the Neuter noun 
आह spoke  - Present 3rd Person Singular of the Verbal root  
हे अच्युत! O Achyuta (the faultless, the immovable) !  - 
मे my  - Dative or Genitive Singular of the Pronoun 
रथम्‌ chariot  - Accusative Singular of the Masculine noun 
उभयोः सेनयोः मध्ये between the two armies  - 
स्थापय stay/set/put  - Imperative 2nd Person Singular of the Causal form of the verbal root  
यावत्‌ so that  - Adverb Indeclinable (whatever) the same is also used as an Adjective meaning 'any'.
योद्धु-कामान्‌ longing for battle  - 
अवस्थितान्‌ standing  - Accusative Plural of the Masculine form of the Past participial Adjective 
एतान्‌ these (myriads)  - Accusative Plural of the Masculine form of the Pronoun 
अहम्‌ निरीक्षे I may view  - 
अस्मिन्‌ रण-समुद्यमे in this holiday of fight  - 
कैः सह with whom  - 
मया योद्धव्यम्‌ I have to fight  - 
युद्धे in the battle  - Locative Singular of the Neuter noun 
दुर्बुद्धेः धार्तराष्ट्रस्य of the evil-minded son of Dhritarashtra  - 
प्रिय-चिकीर्षवः well-wishers  - Nominative Plural of the Masculine form of the Compound desi. participial Adjective 
ये एते those who  - 
अत्र here  - Adverb Indeclinable (here, in this connection)
समागताः have come  - Nominative Plural of the Masculine form of the Past Passive participial Adjective 
योत्स्यमानान्‌ to those ready to fight  - Accusative Plural of the Masculine form of the 
अहम्‌ अवेक्षे I look upon  - 
हे भारत O Bharata (the one born in Bharata, Dhritarashtra) !  - 
गुडाकेशेन by Gudakesha (one who has overcome sleep, Arjuna)  - Instrumental Singular of the Masculine Compound noun 
एवम्‌ thus  - Adverb Indeclinable (thus).
उक्तः addressed  - Nominative Singular of the Masculine form of the Past participial Adjective 
हृषीकेशः Hrishikesha (Krishna, the master of all the sense organs)  - Nominative Singular of the Masculine noun 
उभयोः सेनयोः मध्ये in the middle of / between the two armies  - 
रथ-उत्तमम्‌ best of chariots  - 
स्थापयित्वा having stayed/set/put  - Indeclinable Past Passive participle or Gerund form of the Causal form of the verbal root  
भीष्म-द्रोण-प्रमुखतः in front of Bhisma, Drona  - 
सर्वेषाम्‌ मही-क्षिताम्‌ of all the princes of earth  - 
च and  - Conjunction particle. Indeclinable (and, both, also, as well as)
हे 'पार्थ O Partha !  - 
समवेतान्‌ gathered together  - Accusative Plural of the Masculine form of the Past Passive participial Adjective 
एतान्‌  कुरून्‌ these Kurus  - 
पश्य' behold  - Imperative 2nd  Person Singular of the Verbal root  
इति thus  - Adverb Indeclinable (thus) At some places this particle marks the end of a statement.
उवाच said  - Perfect 3rd Person Singular of the Verbal root  
अथ then  - Indeclinable copulative particle (and, also, then, it also shows the commencement of a literary work or of a new topic in such a work)
पार्थः Partha (the son of Pritha, Arjuna)  - Nominative Singular of the Masculine noun 
तत्र there  - Adverb Indeclinable (there, in that matter, connection).
उभयोः सेनयोः अपि upon opposite sides / in both the armies  - 
स्थितान्‌ standing  - Accusative Plural of the Masculine form of the Past Passive participial Adjective 
पितॄन्‌ uncles  - Accusative Plural of the Masculine noun 
पितामहान्‌ grandsires  - Accusative Plural of the Masculine noun 
आचार्यान्‌ teachers  - Accusative Plural of the Masculine noun 
मातुलान्‌ mother’s brothers  - Accusative Plural of the Masculine noun 
भ्रातॄन्‌ cousins  - 
पुत्रान्‌ sons  - 
पौत्रान्‌ grandsons  - Accusative Plural of the Masculine noun 
तथा and  - Adverb Indeclinable (like that, in that manner, so, thus).
सखीन्‌ comrades  - Accusative Plural of the Masculine noun 
श्वशुरान्‌ fathers-in-law  - Accusative Plural of the Masculine noun 
सुहृदः benefactors  - Accusative Plural of the Masculine form of the Compound Adjective 
च and  - Conjunction particle. Indeclinable (and, both, also, as well as)
एव as well  - Indeclinable particle used to 
अपश्यत्‌ saw  - Imperfect 3rd Person Singular of the Verbal root  
अवस्थितान्‌ standing  - Accusative Plural of the Masculine form of the Past participial Adjective 
तान्‌ सर्वान्‌ all these  - 
बन्धून्‌ kinsmen  - Accusative Plural of the Masculine noun
समीक्ष्य seeing / having seen  - Indeclinable Past participle. or Gerund form of the verbal root  
सः कौन्तेयः that Kaunteya (the son of Kunti, Arjuna)  - 
परया कृपया by great pity  - 
आविष्टः invaded  - Nominative Singular of the Masculine form of the Past Passive participial Adjective 
विषीदन्‌ in sadness and dejection  - Nominative Singular of the Masculine form of the Present participial Adjective 
इदम्‌ this  - Nominative Singular of the Neuter form of the Pronoun 
अब्रवीत्‌ uttered  - Imperfect 3rd Person Singular of the Verbal root  
हे कृष्ण O Krishna !  - 
समुपस्थितम्‌ arrayed  - 
युयुत्सुम्‌ (longing) for battle  - Accusative Singular of the desi. Verbal Masculine noun 
इमम्‌ these  - Accusative Singular of the Masculine form of the Pronoun 
स्वजनम्‌ my own people  - Accusative Singular of the Masculine Compound noun 
दृष्ट्वा seeing / having seen  - Indeclinable Past Participle or Gerund form of the Verbal root  
मम my  - Genitive Singular of the Pronoun 
गात्राणि limbs  - Nominative Plural of the Neuter noun 
सीदन्ति collapse  - Present 3rd Person Plural of the verbal root  
मुखम्‌ mouth  - Nominative Singular of the Neuter noun 
परिशुष्यति is parched  - 
च and  - Conjunction particle. Indeclinable (and, both, also, as well as)
मे शरीरे in my body  - 
वेपथुः quivering takes place  - Nominative Singular of the Masculine noun 
रोम-हर्षः च जायते and my hair stands on end  - 
हस्तात्‌ from (my) hand  - Ablative Singular of the Masculine noun 
गाण्डीवम्‌ Gandiva (Arjuna’s bow)  - Nominative Singular of the Neuter noun 
स्रंसते slips  - Present 3rd Person Singular of the verbal root  
त्वक्‌ (all my) skin  - Nominative Singular of the Neuter noun 
च and  - Conjunction particle. Indeclinable (and, both, also, as well as)
परिदह्यते seems to be burning  - Passive 3rd  Person Singular of the Verbal root  
एव indeed  - Indeclinable particle used to 
मे मनः my mind  - 
भ्रमति  इव seems to be whirling  - 
च and  - Conjunction particle. Indeclinable (and, both, also, as well as)
अवस्थातुम्‌ to stand  - Infinitive of the Verbal root  
च and  - Conjunction particle. Indeclinable (and, both, also, as well as)
न शक्नोमि I am not able  - 
हे केशव O Keshava (Krishna) !  - 
विपरीतानि निमित्तानि evil/adverse omens  - 
च also  - Conjunction particle. Indeclinable (and, both, also, as well as)
पश्यामि I see  - Present 1st Person Singular of the Verbal root  
आहवे in battle  - Locative Singular of the Masculine noun 
स्वजनम्‌ my own people  - Accusative Singular of the Masculine Compound noun 
हत्वा slaying / having slain  - Indeclinable Past Participle or Gerund form of the Verbal root  
च and  - Conjunction particle. Indeclinable (and, both, also, as well as)
न no  - Negative particle Indeclinable (not).
श्रेयः any good  - Nominative or Accusative Singular of the Neuter noun 
अनुपश्यामि I see  - Present 1st Person Singular of the Verbal root  
हे कृष्ण O Krishna  - 
विजयम्‌ victory  - Accusative Singular of the Masculine noun 
न (काङ्क्षे) I desire not  - 
न च राज्यम्‌ nor kingdom  - 
सुखानि च pleasures also  - 
हे गोविन्द O Govinda !  - 
नः for/to us  - An optional form of the Accusative or Dative or Genitive Plural of the Pronoun 
राज्येन किम्‌ what is kingdom?  - 
भोगैः किम्‌ (what) enjoyment?  - 
जीवितेन वा किम्‌ what even life?  - 
येषाम्‌ अर्थे those for whose sake  - 
नः for us  - An optional form of the Accusative or Dative or Genitive Plural of the Pronoun 
राज्यम्‌ kingdom  - Accusative Singular of the Neuter noun 
भोगाः enjoyments  - Nominative Plural of the Masculine noun 
सुखानि pleasures  - Accusative Plural of the Neuter noun 
च and  - Conjunction particle. Indeclinable (and, both, also, as well as)
काङ्क्षितम्‌ desired  - Accusative Singular of the Past participial Adjective 
ते इमे they (those very persons) stand here in battle  - 
आचार्याः teachers  - Nominative Plural of the Masculine noun 
पितरः fathers  - Nominative Plural of the Masculine noun 
पुत्राः sons  - Nominative Plural of the Masculine noun 
तथा च एव as well as  - 
पितामहाः grandsires  - Nominative Plural of the Masculine noun 
प्राणान्‌ life  - Accusative Plural of the Masculine noun 
धनानि riches  - 
च and  - Conjunction particle. Indeclinable (and, both, also, as well as)
त्यक्त्वा abandoning  - Indeclinable Past. Participle or Gerund form of the Verbal root  
युद्धे in battle  - Locative Singular of the Neuter noun 
अवस्थिताः stand  - Nominative Plural of the Masculine form of the Past participial Adjective 
मातुलाः mother’s brothers  - Nominative Plural of the Masculine noun 
श्वशुराः fathers-in-law  - 
पौत्राः grandsons  - Nominative Plural of the Masculine noun 
श्यालाः brothers-in law  - Nominative Plural of the Masculine noun 
तथा and  - Adverb Indeclinable (like that, in that manner, so, thus).
सम्बन्धिनः other kith and kin  - Nominative Plural of the Masculine noun 
हे मधुसूदन O Madhusudana (killer of the demon Madhu)  - 
(मां) घ्नतः (myself) slain  - 
अपि though  - Indeclinable (even, also, and, very, even though).
एतान्‌ these  - Accusative Plural of the Masculine form of the Pronoun 
त्रैलोक्य-राज्यस्य the kingdom of the three worlds  - Genitive Singular of the Neuter Compound noun 
अपि even  - Indeclinable (even, also, and, very, even though).
हेतोः for  - Ablative Singular of the Masculine noun 
हन्तुम्‌ to slay  - Infinitive of the Verbal root  
न इच्छामि I would not consent  - 
महीकृते for earth  - The Feminine noun 
किम्‌ नु how then?  - 
हे जनार्दन O Janardana !  - 
धार्तराष्ट्रान्‌ the sons of Dhritarashtra  - 
निहत्य after killing  - Indeclinable Past Participle or Gerund form of the Verbal root  
नः ours  - An optional form of the Accusative or Dative or Genitive Plural of the Pronoun 
का what  - Nominative Singular of the Feminine form of the Pronoun 
प्रीतिः pleasures  - Nominative Singular of the Feminine noun 
स्यात्‌ can be?  - Potential 3rd Person Singular of the verbal root  
आततायिनः aggressors  - Accusative Plural of the Masculine noun 
एतान्‌ these  - Accusative Plural of the Masculine form of the Pronoun 
हत्वा slaying  - Indeclinable Past Participle or Gerund form of the Verbal root  
पापम्‌ sin  - Nominative or Accusative Singular of the Neuter noun 
एव indeed  - Indeclinable particle used to 
अस्मान्‌ us  - Accusative Plural of the Pronoun 
आश्रयेत्‌ will take hold of  - Potential 3rd Person Singular of the Verbal root  
हे माधव O Madhava (Krishna) !  - 
तस्मात्‌ so  - Ablative Singular of the Masculine or Neuter form of the Pronoun 
स्वबान्धवान्‌ our kinsmen  - 
धार्तराष्ट्रान्‌ the sons of Dhritarashtra  - 
हन्तुम्‌ to kill  - Infinitive of the Verbal root  
वयम्‌ we  - Nominative Plural of the personal Pronoun 
न अर्हाः ought not  - 
हि for  - A causal or expletive Indeclinable particle. When causal it has the sense of 'for' or 'because'. As an expletive it has the sense of 'indeed', 'surely', 'for instance', 'as is well-known' etc.
स्वजनम्‌ our own people  - Accusative Singular of the Masculine Compound noun 
हत्वा killing  - Indeclinable Past Participle or Gerund form of the Verbal root  
कथम्‌ how?  - Adverb Indeclinable (how).
सुखिनः happy  - Nominative Plural of the Masculine noun 
स्याम may we be  - Potential 1st Person Plural of the verbal root  
हे जनार्दन O Janardana (Krishna) !  - 
यदि अपि although  - 
लोभ-उपहत-चेतसः with a consciousness clouded with greed  - 
एते these  - Nominative Plural of the Masculine form or Nominative Dual of the Feminine form of the Pronoun 
कुल-क्षय-कृतम्‌ resulting from the destruction of the family  - Accusative Singular of the Neuter form of the Compound Adjective 
दोषम्‌ the guilt  - Accusative Singular of the Masculine noun 
मित्र-द्रोहे in hostility to friends  - Locative Singular of the Masculine Compound noun 
पातकम्‌ the crime  - Accusative Singular of the Neuter noun 
च and  - Conjunction particle. Indeclinable (and, both, also, as well as)
न पश्यन्ति; see not  - 
कुल-क्षय-कृतम्‌ resulting from the destruction of the family  - Accusative Singular of the Neuter form of the Compound Adjective 
दोषम्‌ the evil  - Accusative Singular of the Masculine noun 
प्रपश्यद्भिः अस्माभिः we who see  - 
अस्मात्‌ पापात्‌ from such a sin  - 
निवर्तितुम्‌ to draw back  - Infinitive of the Verbal root  
कथम्‌ न why should not  - 
ज्ञेयम्‌ (we) have the wisdom  - Nominative or Accusative Singular of the Neuter form of the Potential participial Adjective 
कुल-क्षये in the annihilation of the family  - Locative Singular of the Masculine Compound noun 
सनातनाः eternal  - Nominative Plural of the Masculine form of the Adjective 
कुल-धर्माः traditions of the family  - Nominative Plural of the Masculine Compound noun 
प्रणश्यन्ति are destroyed  - Present 3rd Person Plural of the Verbal root  
उत and  - Indeclinable particle used to add emphasis or to express a guess (and, also, even, as well).
धर्मे नष्टे in the collapse of traditions  - 
कृत्स्नम्‌ the whole/entire  - Accusative Singular of the Neuter form of the Adjective 
कुलम्‌ family  - Nominative Singular of the Neuter noun 
अधर्मः lawlessness  - Nominative Singular of the Masculine Compound noun 
अभिभवति overcomes/besets  - Present 3rd Person Singular of the Verbal root  
हे कृष्ण O Krishna !  - 
अधर्म-अभिभवात्‌ owing to predominance of lawlessness  - 
कुल-स्त्रियः the women of the family  - Nominative Plural of the Feminine Compound noun 
प्रदुष्यन्ति become corrupt  - Present 3rd Person Plural of the Verbal root  
हे वार्ष्णेय O Varshneya !  - 
स्त्रीषु दुष्टासु women corrupted  - 
वर्ण-सङ्करः the confusion of the varṇas (the four-fold order of the society)  - Nominative Singular of the Masculine form of the Compound Adjective 
जायते arises  - Present 3rd Person Singular of the Verbal root  
सङ्करः (this) confusion  - Nominative Singular of the Masculine noun 
कुल-घ्नानाम्‌ (of) the ruiners of the family  - Genitive Plural of the Masculine form of the Compound Adjective 
कुलस्य (of) the family  - Genitive Singular of the Neuter noun 
च and  - Conjunction particle. Indeclinable (and, both, also, as well as)
नरकाय for hell  - Dative Singular of the Masculine noun 
एव surely  - Indeclinable particle used to 
लुप्त-पिण्ड-उदक-क्रियाः deprived of piKoa (rice offering) and libations  - 
एषाम्‌ their  - Genitive Plural of the Masculine form of the Pronoun 
पितरः ancestors  - Nominative Plural of the Masculine noun 
हि for  - A causal or expletive Indeclinable particle. When causal it has the sense of 'for' or 'because'. As an expletive it has the sense of 'indeed', 'surely', 'for instance', 'as is well-known' etc.
पतन्ति fall  - Present 3rd  Person Plural of the Verbal root  
वर्ण-सङ्कर-कारकैः (by) the confusion of the orders  - 
एतैः by these  - Instrumental Plural of the Masculine or Neuter form of the Pronoun 
दोषैः misdeeds  - Instrumental Plural of the Masculine noun 
कुल-घ्नानाम्‌ of the ruiners of the family  - Genitive Plural of the Masculine form of the Compound Adjective 
शाश्वताः eternal  - Nominative Plural of the Masculine form of the Adjective 
जाति-धर्माः aws of the race  - Nominative Plural of the Masculine Compound noun 
कुल-धर्माः moral law of the family  - Nominative Plural of the Masculine Compound noun 
च and  - Conjunction particle. Indeclinable (and, both, also, as well as)
उत्साद्यन्ते are destroyed  - Passive 3rd Person Plural of the Verbal root  
हे जनार्दन O Janardana !  - 
उत्सन्न-कुल-धर्माणाम्‌ of them whose family morals are corrupted  - Genitive Plural of the Masculine form of the Compound Adjective 
मनुष्याणाम्‌ of men  - Genitive Plural of the Masculine noun 
नियतम्‌ for ever  - Adverb Indeclinable (rightly regulated). (surely or positively). Here in this verse the word used is as अनियतम्   
नरके in hell  - Locative Singular of the Masculine noun 
वासः abode  - Nominative Singular of the Masculine noun 
भवति is assured  - Present 3rd Person Singular  of the Verbal root  
इति thus  - Adverb Indeclinable (thus) At some places this particle marks the end of a statement.
अनुशुश्रुम have we heard  - Perfect 1st Person Plural of the Verbal root  
अहो! बत alas!  - 
वयम्‌ we  - Nominative Plural of the personal Pronoun 
महत्‌ पापम्‌ a great sin  - 
कर्तुम्‌ to commit  - Infinitive of the Verbal root  
व्यवसिताः are engaged  - 
यत्‌ that  - Nominative or Accusative Singular of the Neuter form of the Pronoun yad (that which). At some places used as an Adjective also but in the same sense. Adverb Indeclinable (in that, whether or if, according to context).
राज्य-सुख-लोभेन through greed of the pleasures of kingship  - Instrumental Singular of the Masculine Compound noun 
स्वजनम्‌ our own people  - Accusative Singular of the Masculine Compound noun 
हन्तुम्‌ to kill  - Infinitive of the Verbal root  
उद्यताः (we are) endeavouring  - Nominative Plural of the Masculine form of the Past Passive participial Adjective 
